Background: We are trying to improve on WeBWorK's randomization by moving beyond random numbers to random problem structure. In calculus, we are exploiting the fact that students learn a short list of differentiation and integration rules and are expecting to apply nothing more than these in many problems. This allows us to randomly string together solution rules in order to produce solvable problems of appropriate difficulty and complexity. We represent the problems via weighted trees for several reasons. Most interestingly for mathematicians, we can later use collected responses as training data for learning how to rate problems, say on a multiparameter Item Response Theory scale. The tree retains the semantic information about the problem structure, so should give a good model for automated rating. (Eventually, the hope is to provide free automated test banks.) We also gain the ability to require or exclude certain rules during problem generation.

In order to apply the algorithm, we must provide it with so-called production rules corresponding to each possible problem step, along with solution rules and prior estimates of difficulty weighting. For calculus, these are elementary functions, such as FUNCTION->(sin(x)), which provide all the terminal symbols, as well as grammar-type rules, such as FUNCTION->COMPOSE. Diff Eq problems are likely to follow a similar model. Lin Alg probably requires more thought.

As an example, one could produce problems with the template "Find the inverse Laplace transform of F(s)." F(s) would be randomly built up from pieces and steps that the student should know how to handle. By providing corresponding solution production rules, f(t) may be produced automatically, along with a step-by-step solution amenable to providing hints. It is then routine to check the user response against f(t) via a small number of random test points.
